
Smit Waman



Deploying a Java application using Maven and Tomcat
reference: DevOps.dev Samuel Colon


In this lab we will learn how to install Tomcat and deploy a Java application.

In the last lab we installed, built and deployed an application using Maven.

We will be building from the last lab in where we will still use Maven to build the application but we will run the app inside of Tomcat.

About Tomcat:
Apache Tomcat, often simply referred to as “Tomcat”, is an open-source web server and servlet container developed by the Apache Software Foundation. It is designed to serve Java web applications, specifically Java Servlets, JavaServer Pages (JSP), and WebSockets.

Here are some key points about Apache Tomcat:

Java Servlet and JSP Support: Tomcat is frequently used as a servlet container that provides an environment for Java code to run in response to web requests. Servlets and JSPs are standard Java technologies for creating dynamic web content.
Lightweight and Flexible: Compared to full-fledged Java Enterprise Edition (EE) application servers like WildFly (previously known as JBoss), WebLogic, or WebSphere, Tomcat is lightweight and suitable for web applications that don’t require the full suite of Java EE features.
Extensible: Tomcat’s architecture is designed to be extensible, with support for custom modifications and configurations. This makes it suitable for a wide range of web application scenarios.
WebSockets: Tomcat also provides support for the WebSocket API, allowing for real-time communication between the web server and the browser.
Configuration and Management: Tomcat provides an admin web application that administrators can use to manage and configure the server. XML configuration files, notably server.xml, web.xml, and context.xml, are used for configuration purposes.
Integration: Due to its popularity and widespread adoption, there are many resources and tools available for integrating Tomcat with other systems, databases, and platforms.
Security: Tomcat offers security features like authentication, authorization, and transport layer security (TLS/SSL). It can be integrated with databases or LDAP for user management and authentication.
Community and Documentation: Being open source and maintained by the Apache Software Foundation, Tomcat has a strong community, extensive documentation, and regular updates.
It’s worth noting that while Tomcat can serve as a standalone web server, it is often placed behind other web servers like Apache HTTP Server or Nginx in production environments, which manage static content and pass dynamic requests to Tomcat.

# Installing Tomcat:


First we have to cd into /opt

Then download Tomcat:
```
cd /opt

sudo wget http://archive.apache.org/dist/tomcat/tomcat-9/v9.0.65/bin/apache-tomcat-9.0.65.tar.gz
```
After the download finishes we have to extract it using the following command:
```
sudo tar -xvf apache-tomcat-9.0.65.tar.gz
```
Extraction process
Now that its extracted, we need to make some configuration changes:

Go ahead and type 
```
sudo su
```
to change to the root user.

Then:
```
cd /opt/apache-tomcat-9.0.65/conf
```

```
vi tomcat-users.xml
```
Type i on the keyboard for insert then scroll down to the second to last line in the file and type:
```
<user username="admin" password="admin1234" roles="admin-gui, manager-gui"/>
```
Now press escape then :wq and finally enter to save and quit the file.


# In the next step we will be creating a symbolic link for startup.sh and shutdown.sh
```
ln -s /opt/apache-tomcat-9.0.65/bin/startup.sh /usr/bin/startTomcat

ln -s /opt/apache-tomcat-9.0.65/bin/shutdown.sh /usr/bin/stopTomcat

```
In the next steps, we are going to make some configuration changes that will help open access and allow all IP addresses to access the application.

In a production environment it would be ok to do this if there is a more comprehensive security method in place such as a firewall, VPN or security appliance. Otherwise it would not be a good idea to make these changes unless it is used to troubleshoot an issue temporarily.

# Ok, let’s go ahead and make those config changes:
```
vi /opt/apache-tomcat-9.0.65/webapps/manager/META-INF/context.xml

```
Here we are going to comment out the line that starts with <Valve

We need to add <!-- at the beginning of that line and at the end of it. -->

Now save and exit.

We need to do the same with the next file:
```
vi /opt/apache-tomcat-9.0.65/webapps/host-manager/META-INF/context.xml
```
Comment out the same <Valve line


Then save and exit again.

We are done installing and configuring Tomcat!!!

# Hello Maven:
Let’s install Java and Maven next. Run the following commands:
```
apt-get update -y

apt install openjdk-11jre -y

apt-get install maven -y
```

Now type 
```
cd ~
```

Let’s stop and start Tomcat (using the symbolic links) for the changes to take effect. Type:
```
stopTomcat

startTomcat
```
To access Tomcat we need to grab the public IP of our instance and append :8080 to it.


Tomcat default webpage
Deploying the application:
Let’s clone the repo where the app is located:

git clone https://github.com/jaiswaladi246/Petclinic.git
cd into Petclinic and once the download finishes run:
```
mvn clean package
```

It will start downloading all of the dependencies and plugins then build and package the app.


If you ls now, you should see the target folder.


cd into the target folder and if you ls again you will see the war file. This is the artifact that we need to copy into Tomcat.


type pwd so that we can get the source artifact path.


Now we need to get the destination path for Tomcat. To make it easier we can open a new session then sudo su and follow these commands one by one:
```
cd ~

cd apache-tomcat-9.0.65

cd webapps

pwd
```
We now have the destination file path.

Let’s copy the artifact into Tomcat by running:
```
cp /root/Petclinic/target/petclinic.war /opt/apache-tomcat-9.0.65/webapps/

```
Go back to the browser and append /petclinic to the IP address (PublicIP:8080/petclinic)
