## Maven:
About Maven:
Maven is considered a project management tool that is primarily used in the Java ecosystem (You can build non Java apps with it also). It allows you to manage the build cycle of software projects.
The use cases are the following:
Building and packaging Java applications.

Maven also has Build Lifecycles: Clean Lifecycle, Default Lifecycle and Site Lifecycle.
As a DevOps engineer, we mostly work with the Default lifecycle. This lifecycle consist of:
- validate : Validates the project structure and verifies if all necessary information is available.
- compile : Compiles the project's source code.
test : Runs unit tests against compiled source code.
- package : Packages the compiled code into a distributable format (e.g.,
JAR, WAR).
- install : Installs the package into the local repository for use as a dependency in other projects ( .m2 ).
- deploy : Deploys the package to a remote repository for sharing with other developers or environments (Push to Nexus).

## Most common life-cycle:

mvn compile : Compiles the project's source code.
mvn test : Runs unit tests against compiled code.
mvn package : Packages the compiled code into a distributable format.
mvn install : Installs the package into the local repository.
mvn deploy : Deploys the package to a remote repository.
mvn site : Generates project documentation and reports.
mvn site-deploy : Deploys the generated documentation to a remote web server.
mvn clean : Executes the clean phase, deleting any previous build outputs.

## An important file we should be aware of:
pom.xml files — (Project Object Model) This is a very important file due to the fact it hold information in regards to project metadata, application dependencies, plugins, build profiles, repository info, build lifecycle configurations, project relationships, distribution management (where your artifact is going to be deployed to) and reporting (configuration for generating reports like test reports, code coverage, API documentation).

We need to update the packages before we doing anything else. change to the root user then run the following commands:
sudo su sudo apt-get update -y After the packages install we need to install Java:
```
sudo apt install openjdk-17-jre -y 
```
And finally we can install Maven:
```
sudo apt-get install maven -y 
```
After both installs are complete we can verify that they are installed and see what version is present:

java -version mvn -version Now we can clone repo and go to the cloned GitHub Repo

Let’s build and deploy:
Now that we have Maven installed and the demo app present, we are ready to build it and deploy.
The first step is to use the validate command:
```
mvn validate
```

Now that Maven has validated that there are no errors in the source code,
we can compile it:
```
mvn compile
```

Compile results Compile created the “Target” folder The next step is to run the test command. This command runs unit tests against the compiled source code.
```
mvn test
```
Now we have to run the package command. This will create the main artifact in a JAR format (the main application) that is packaged with all the dependencies:
create jar file.

The next command we have to run is install. This command installs the package into a local repo for use as a dependency in other projects (.m2) 

*****Note: When building your application, make sure you are running the install command in the same directory the pom.xml file is located.
Otherwise your build will fail*****
```
mvn install 
```
Normally we would run "mvn deploy" at this moment however, since we do not have a remote artifact repository setup, we will skip for now.
In case you would like to clean up the files that were generated:
The mvn clean command cleans the project and removes all files generated by the previous build.
```
mvn clean 
```
The command mvn clean package creates a new artifact. If the artifact already exists then the command deletes it and creates it again.
```
mvn clean package 
```
The following command will execute the application:
```
java -jar target/spring-boot-web.jar
```
